astro/astro-paper-main/src/pages/about.md, before:

---
layout: ../layouts/AboutLayout.astro
title: "About"
---

AstroPaper is a minimal, responsive and SEO-friendly Astro blog theme. I designed and crafted this based on [my personal blog](https://satnaing.dev/blog).

This theme is aimed to be accessible out of the box. Light and dark mode are supported by
default and additional color schemes can also be configured.

This theme is self-documented \_ which means articles/posts in this theme can also be considered as documentations. So, see the documentation for more info.

<div>
  <img src="/assets/dev.svg" class="sm:w-1/2 mx-auto" alt="coding dev illustration">
</div>

## Tech Stack

This theme is written in vanilla JavaScript (+ TypeScript for type checking) and a little bit of ReactJS for some interactions. TailwindCSS is used for styling; and Markdown is used for blog contents.

## Features

Here are certain features of this site.

- fully responsive and accessible
- SEO-friendly
- light & dark mode
- fuzzy search
- super fast performance
- draft posts
- pagination
- sitemap & rss feed
- highly customizable

If you like this theme, you can star/contribute to the [repo](https://github.com/satnaing/astro-paper).  
Or you can even give any feedback via my [email](mailto:contact@satnaing.dev).

Commit message:

partial implementation, bmac not working

astro/astro-paper-main/src/pages/about.md, after:

---
layout: ../layouts/AboutLayout.astro
title: "About"
---

I'm a senior software developer with about X years of experience (todo, automate that!) doing devops and developement work.
I've worked in retail, tax software and aerospace industries, and in all of those positions I was always pushing the limit
as far as I could. Always trying to use bleeding edge tools where I can!

This blog is my first attempt at technical writing, and the main goal is to write articles that I wish I had found. I couldn't
count how many times I've dug through Github issues or old forums trying to solve an issue, so when I come across a solution that required
a mountain of research, I write about it here! Similarly, a lot of articles and posts only contain partial or non-functional examples.

I hate that, so I aim for my posts to actually be useful to whoever comes across them! (Or me, 6 months from now)

TODO - replace this image!
<div>
  <img src="/assets/dev.svg" class="sm:w-1/2 mx-auto" alt="coding dev illustration">
</div>

## This Site

This site is a copy of the astro project by https://github.com/satnaing/astro-paper. 

I previously had a site made in Jekyll, but
very quickly I struggled to get Jekyll to do what I wanted. From
there I found a template I liked, made sure to stay within the license requirements, and get to work writing!
